doc/source/guide/gui-tool-usage.md, before:

---

uid: SmartSetup.GUIToolUsage

---
# GUI tool usage

Alternatively to command-line, you can use the GUI tool. Just launch `tmsgui.exe` executable. 

If the working folder is not initialized, it will first ask for credentials to download products from repository. If you skip this step, no credentials will be saved and you can continue using the GUI to build projects that have been manually downloaded:

{{#image}}tmsgui-login.png{{/image}}

The GUI tool lists the installed and available products in the main listing view. 

{{#image}}tmsgui-main-screen.png{{/image}}

At the right, you have some buttons that perform on the selected products:

- **Install**: download and install the selected products. Equivalent to `tms install` command.
- **Uninstall**: uninstall the selected products. Equivalent to `tms uninstall` command.
- **Full build/Partial build**: rebuild the selected products. If no products are selected, rebuild everything. Equivalent to `tms build -full` and `tms build` commands
- **Configure**: create (if missing) and open the YAML configuration file. Equivalent to `tms config` command.
- **Credentials**: ask for new credentials. Equivalent to `tms credentials` command.

In the status bar, at the bottom of the main window, the GUI displays the current working folder, and the current Smart Setup version.

Under the hood, the GUI just executes the `tms` command-line. The `Output` tab shows the output of the current command-line being executed. For long-running commands like installing and building, you can switch to it to follow the progress of the execution.

Commit message:

download the docs to a separate folder. It worked the same as it was, but it could be uploading stuff we didn't want.
Also updated the tmsgui screenshots, just to be 100% sure this is working

doc/source/guide/gui-tool-usage.md, after:

---

uid: SmartSetup.GUIToolUsage

---
# GUI tool usage

Alternatively to command-line, you can use the GUI tool. Just launch `tmsgui.exe` executable. 

If the working folder is not initialized, it will first ask you what servers you want to enable:

{{#image}}tmsgui-welcome-dialog.png{{/image}}

Here, you can choose if you want to manage **tms** products, if you want manage products from the **community** server, or both.

If you enable the tms server, you will get another dialog asking you for the credentials:

{{#image}}tmsgui-login.png{{/image}}

And then you should arrive to the main view:

{{#image}}tmsgui-main-screen.png{{/image}}

1. **Search box**: type to find the product you want to install
2. **Filter pane**: select if to see all available products, or only installed ones.
3. **Product list**: a list of all products installed or available
4. **Server selection box** this box is only visible if there is more than one active server, and it allows to filter the results by server
5. **Settings**: Set general settings for tms/tmsgui
6. **Install**: download and install the selected products. Equivalent to `tms install` command.
7. **Uninstall**: uninstall the selected products. Equivalent to `tms uninstall` command.
8. **Full build/Partial build**: rebuild the selected products. If no products are selected, rebuild everything. Equivalent to `tms build -full` and `tms build` commands
9. **Credentials**: ask for new credentials. Equivalent to `tms credentials` command.
10.**Configure**: create (if missing) and open the YAML configuration file. Equivalent to `tms config` command.
11.**Output tab**: shows the output of the current command-line being executed. For long-running commands like installing and building, you can switch to it to follow the progress of the execution.
12. **Status bar**: at the bottom of the main window, the GUI displays the current working folder, and the current Smart Setup version.

When there are errors, an error pane will show:

{{#image}}tmsgui-errors.png{{/image}}

If you click on the messages of the error pane, it will show more detailed information about the particular error.
